<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>X: The Escape</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-10" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="z3998:ordinal z3998:roman">X</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">The Escape</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>Shuddering, uncertain how to act next, VГ©ronique listened till she no longer heard the sound of his footsteps. What should she do? The murder of StГ©phane had for a moment turned her thoughts from FranГ§ois; but she now once more fell a prey to anguish. What had become of her son? Should she go to him at the Priory and defend him against the dangers that threatened him?</p>
			<p>вҖңCome, come,вҖқ she said, вҖңIвҖҷm losing my head.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Let me think things out.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ A few hours ago, FranГ§ois was speaking to me through the wall of his prisonвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ for it was certainly he then, it was certainly FranГ§ois who yesterday took my hand and covered it with his kisses.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ A mother cannot be deceived; and I was quivering with love and tenderness.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ But sinceвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ since this morning has he not left his prison?вҖқ</p>
			<p>She stopped to think and then said, slowly:</p>
			<p>вҖңThatвҖҷs itвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ thatвҖҷs what happened.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ StГ©phane and I were discovered below, on the floor underneath. The alarm was given at once. The monster, VorskiвҖҷs son, had gone up expressly to watch FranГ§ois. He found the cell empty and, seeing the opening which had been made, crawled out here. Yes, thatвҖҷs it.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ If not, by what way did he come?вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ When he got here, it occurred to him to run to the window, knowing that it overlooked the sea and suspecting that FranГ§ois had chosen it to make his escape. He at once saw the hooks of the ladder. Then, on leaning over, he saw me, knew who I was and called out to me.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ And nowвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ now he is on his way to the Priory, where he is bound to meet FranГ§ois.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>Nevertheless VГ©ronique did not stir. She had an instinct that the danger lay not at the Priory but here, by the cells. And she wondered whether FranГ§ois had really succeeded in escaping and whether, before his task was done, he had not been surprised by the other and attacked by him.</p>
			<p>It was a horrible doubt! She stooped quickly and, perceiving that the hole had been widened, tried to pass through it herself. But the outlet, at most large enough for a child, was too narrow for her; and her shoulders became fixed. She persisted in the attempt, however, tearing her bodice and bruising her skin against the rock, and at last, by dint of patience and wriggling, succeeded in slipping through.</p>
			<p>The cell was empty. But the door was open on the passages facing her; and VГ©ronique had an impressionвҒ вҖ”merely an impression, for the window admitted only a faint lightвҒ вҖ”that someone was just leaving the cell through the open door. And from this confused impression of something that she had not absolutely seen she retained the certainty that it was a woman who was hiding there, in the passage, a woman surprised by her unexpected entrance.</p>
			<p>вҖңItвҖҷs their accomplice,вҖқ thought VГ©ronique. вҖңShe came up with the boy who killed StГ©phane, and she has no doubt taken FranГ§ois away.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Perhaps FranГ§ois is even there still, quite near me, while sheвҖҷs watching me.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>Meanwhile VГ©roniqueвҖҷs eyes were growing accustomed to the semidarkness and she distinctly saw a womanвҖҷs hand upon the door, which opened inwardly. The hand was slowly pulling.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhy doesnвҖҷt she shut it at once,вҖқ VГ©ronique wondered, вҖңsince she obviously wants to put a barrier between us?вҖқ</p>
			<p>VГ©ronique received her answer when she heard a pebble grating under the door and interfering with its movement. If the pebble were not there, the door would be closed. Without hesitating, VГ©ronique went up, took hold of a great iron handle and pulled it towards her. The hand disappeared, but the opposition continued. There was evidently a handle on the other side as well.</p>
			<p>Suddenly she heard a whistle. The woman was summoning assistance. And almost at the same time, in the passage, at some distance from the woman, there was a cry:</p>
			<p>вҖңMother! Mother!вҖқ</p>
			<p>Ah, with what deep emotion VГ©ronique heard that cry! Her son, her real son was calling to her, her son, still a captive but alive! Oh, the superhuman delight of it!</p>
			<p>вҖңIвҖҷm here, darling!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңQuick, mother! IвҖҷm tied up; and the whistle is their signalвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ theyвҖҷll be coming.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңIвҖҷm here.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I shall save you before they come!вҖқ</p>
			<p>She had no doubt of the result. It seemed to her as though her strength knew no limits and as though nothing could resist the exasperated tension of her whole being.</p>
			<p>Her adversary was in fact weakening and giving ground by inches. The opening became wider; and suddenly the contest was over. VГ©ronique walked through.</p>
			<p>The woman had already fled down the passage and was dragging the boy by a rope in order to make him walk despite the cords with which he was bound. It was a vain attempt and she abandoned it forthwith. VГ©ronique was close to her, with her revolver in her hand.</p>
			<p>The woman let go the boy and stood up in the light from the open cells. She was dressed in white serge, with a knotted girdle round her waist. Her arms were half bare. Her face was still young, but faded, thin and wrinkled. Her hair was fair, interspersed with strands of white. Her eyes gleamed with a feverish hatred.</p>
			<p>The two women looked at each other without a word, like two adversaries who have met before and are about to fight again. VГ©ronique almost smiled, with a smile of mingled triumph and defiance. In the end she said:</p>
			<p>вҖңIf you dare to lay a finger on my child, IвҖҷll kill you. Go! Be off!вҖқ</p>
			<p>The woman was not frightened. She seemed to be reflecting and to be listening in the expectation of assistance. None come. Then she lowered her eyes to FranГ§ois and made a movement as though to seize upon her prey again.</p>
			<p>вҖңDonвҖҷt touch him!вҖқ VГ©ronique exclaimed, violently. вҖңDonвҖҷt touch him, or I fire!вҖқ</p>
			<p>The woman shrugged her shoulders and said, in measured accents:</p>
			<p>вҖңNo threats, please! If I had wanted to kill that child of yours, I should have done so by now. But his hour has not come; and it is not by my hand that he is to die.вҖқ</p>
			<p>VГ©ronique, trembling all over, could not help asking:</p>
			<p>вҖңBy whose hand is he to die?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңBy my sonвҖҷs: you knowвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ the one youвҖҷve seen.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңIs he your son, the murderer, the monster?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңHeвҖҷs the son ofвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңSilence! Silence!вҖқ VГ©ronique commanded. She understood that the woman had been VorskiвҖҷs mistress and feared that she would make some disclosure in FranГ§oisвҖҷ presence. вҖңSilence: that name is not to be spoken.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңIt will be when it has to be,вҖқ said the woman. вҖңAh, IвҖҷve suffered enough through you, VГ©ronique: itвҖҷs your turn now; and youвҖҷre only at the beginning of it!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңGo!вҖқ cried VГ©ronique, pointing her revolver.</p>
			<p>вҖңOnce more, no threats, please.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңGo, or I fire! I swear it on the head of my son.вҖқ</p>
			<p>The woman retreated, betraying a certain anxiety in spite of herself. But she was seized with a fresh access of rage. Impotently she raised her clenched fists and shouted, in a raucous, broken voice:</p>
			<p>вҖңI will be revengedвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ You shall see. VГ©ronique.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The crossвҒ вҖ”do you understand?вҒ вҖ”the cross is ready.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ You are the fourth.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ What, oh, what a revenge!вҖқ</p>
			<p>She shook her gnarled, bony fists. And she continued:</p>
			<p>вҖңOh, how I hate you! Fifteen years of hatred! But the cross will avenge me.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I shall string you up on it myself.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ The cross is readyвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ youвҖҷll seeвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ the cross is ready for you!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>She walked away slowly, holding herself erect under the threat of the revolver.</p>
			<p>вҖңDonвҖҷt kill her, mother, will you?вҖқ whispered FranГ§ois, suspecting the contest in his motherвҖҷs mind.</p>
			<p>VГ©ronique seemed to wake from a dream:</p>
			<p>вҖңNo, no,вҖқ she replied, вҖңdonвҖҷt be afraid.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ And yet perhaps I ought toвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңOh, please let her be, mother, and let us go away.вҖқ</p>
			<p>She lifted him in her arms, even before the woman was out of sight, pressed him to her and carried him to the cell as though he weighed no more than a little child.</p>
			<p>вҖңMother, mother,вҖқ he said.</p>
			<p>вҖңYes, darling, your own mother; and no one shall take you from me again, that I swear to you.вҖқ</p>
			<p>Without troubling about the wounds inflicted by the stone she slipped, this time almost at the first attempt, through the gap made by FranГ§ois, drew him after her and then, but not before, released him from his bonds.</p>
			<p>вҖңThere is no danger here,вҖқ she said, вҖңat least for the moment, because they can hardly get at us except by the cell and I shall be able to defend the entrance.вҖқ</p>
			<p>Mother and son exchanged the fondest of embraces. There was now no barrier to part their lips and their arms. They could see each other, could gaze into each otherвҖҷs eyes.</p>
			<p>вҖңHow handsome you are, my darling!вҖқ said VГ©ronique.</p>
			<p>She saw no resemblance between him and the boy murderer and was astonished that Honorine could have taken one for the other. And she felt as if she would never weary of admiring the breeding, the frankness and the sweetness which she read in his face.</p>
			<p>вҖңAnd you, mother,вҖқ he said, вҖңdo you think that I ever pictured a mother as beautiful as you? No, not even in my dreams, when you seemed as lovely as a fairy. And yet StГ©phane often used to tell meвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>She interrupted him:</p>
			<p>вҖңWe must hurry, dearest, and take refuge from their pursuit. We must go.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңYes,вҖқ he said, вҖңand above all we must leave Sarek. I have invented a plan of escape which is bound to succeed. But, first of all, StГ©phane: what has become of him? I heard the sound of which I spoke to you underneath my cell and I fearвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>She dragged him along by the hand, without answering his question:</p>
			<p>вҖңI have many things to tell you, darling, painful things which I must no longer keep from you. But presently will do.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ For the moment we must take refuge in the Priory. That woman will go in search of help and come after us.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңBut she was not alone, mother, when she entered my cell suddenly and caught me in the act of digging at the wall. There was someone with her.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңA boy, wasnвҖҷt it? A boy of your own size?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңI could hardly see. He and the woman fell upon me, bound me and carried me into the passage. Then the woman left me for a moment and he went back to the cell. He therefore knows about this tunnel by now and about the exit in the Priory grounds.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңYes, I know. But we shall easily get the better of him; and weвҖҷll block up the exit.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңBut there remains the bridge which joins the two islands,вҖқ FranГ§ois objected.</p>
			<p>вҖңNo,вҖқ she said, вҖңI burnt it down and the Priory is absolutely cut off.вҖқ</p>
			<p>They were walking very quickly, VГ©ronique pressing her pace, FranГ§ois a little anxious at the words spoken by his mother.</p>
			<p>вҖңYes, yes,вҖқ he said, вҖңI see that there is a good deal which I donвҖҷt know and which you have kept from me, mother, in order not to frighten me. For instance, when you burnt down the bridge.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ It was with the petrol set aside for the purpose, wasnвҖҷt it, and as arranged with Maguennoc in case of danger? So you were threatened too; and the first attack was made on you, mother?вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ And then there was something that woman said with such a hateful look on her face!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ And thenвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ and then, above all, what has become of StГ©phane? They were whispering about him just now in my cell.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ All this worries me.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Then again I donвҖҷt see the ladder which you brought.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңPlease, dearest, donвҖҷt let us wait a moment. The woman will have found assistance.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>The boy stopped short:</p>
			<p>вҖңMother.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWhat? Do you hear anything?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңSomeone walking.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAre you sure?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңSomeone coming this way.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңOh,вҖқ she said, in a hollow voice, вҖңitвҖҷs the murderer coming back from the Priory!вҖқ</p>
			<p>She felt her revolver and prepared herself for anything that might happen. But suddenly she pushed FranГ§ois towards a dark corner on her left, formed by the entry to one of those tunnels, probably blocked, which she had noticed when she came.</p>
			<p>вҖңGet in there,вҖқ she said. вҖңWe shall be all right here: he will not see us.вҖқ</p>
			<p>The sound approached.</p>
			<p>вҖңStand well back,вҖқ she said, вҖңand donвҖҷt stir.вҖқ</p>
			<p>The boy whispered:</p>
			<p>вҖңWhatвҖҷs that in your hand? A revolver? Mother, youвҖҷre not going to fire?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңI ought to, I ought to,вҖқ said VГ©ronique. вҖңHeвҖҷs such a monster!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ ItвҖҷs as with his motherвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ I ought to haveвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ we shall perhaps regret it.вҖқ And she added, almost unconsciously, вҖңHe killed your grandfather.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңOh, mother, mother!вҖқ</p>
			<p>She supported him, to prevent his falling, and amid the silence she heard the boy sobbing on her breast and stammering:</p>
			<p>вҖңNever mindвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ donвҖҷt fire, mother.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңHere he comes, darling, here he comes; look at him.вҖқ</p>
			<p>The other passed. He was walking slowly, a little bent, listening for the least sound. He appeared to VГ©ronique to be the exact same size as her son; and this time, when she looked at him with more attention, she was not so much surprised that Honorine and <abbr>M.</abbr> dвҖҷHergemont had been taken in, for there were really some points of resemblance, which would have been accentuated by the fact that he was wearing the red cap stolen from FranГ§ois.</p>
			<p>He walked on.</p>
			<p>вҖңDo you know him?вҖқ asked VГ©ronique.</p>
			<p>вҖңNo, mother.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAre you sure that you never saw him?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңSure.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAnd it was he who fell upon you, with the woman, in your cell?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңI havenвҖҷt a doubt of it, mother. He even hit me in the face, for no reason, with absolute hatred.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңOh,вҖқ she said, вҖңthis is all incomprehensible! When shall we escape this awful nightmare?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңQuick, mother, the roadвҖҷs clear. LetвҖҷs make the most of it.вҖқ</p>
			<p>On returning to the light, she saw that he was very pale and felt his hand in hers like a lump of ice. Nevertheless he looked up at her with a smile of happiness.</p>
			<p>They set out again; and soon, after passing the strip of cliff that joined the two islands and climbing the staircases, they emerged in the open air, to the right of MaguennocвҖҷs garden. The daylight was beginning to wane.</p>
			<p>вҖңWe are saved,вҖқ said VГ©ronique.</p>
			<p>вҖңYes,вҖқ replied the boy, вҖңbut only on condition that they cannot reach us by the same road. We shall have to bar it, therefore.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңHow?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWait for me here; IвҖҷll go and fetch some tools at the Priory.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңOh, donвҖҷt let us leave each other, FranГ§ois!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңYou can come with me, mother.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAnd suppose the enemy arrives in the meantime? No, we must defend this outlet.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңThen help me, mother.вҖқ</p>
			<p>A rapid inspection showed them that one of the two stones which formed a roof above the entrance was not very firmly rooted in its place. They found no difficulty in first shifting and then clearing it. The stone fell across the staircase and was at once covered by an avalanche of earth and pebbles which made the passage, if not impracticable, at least very hard to manage.</p>
			<p>вҖңAll the more so,вҖқ said FranГ§ois, вҖңas we shall stay here until we are able to carry out my plan. And be easy, mother; itвҖҷs a sound scheme and we have nearly managed it.вҖқ</p>
			<p>For that matter, they recognized above all, that rest was essential. They were both of them worn out.</p>
			<p>вҖңLie down, motherвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ look, just here: thereвҖҷs a bed of moss under this overhanging rock which makes a regular nest. YouвҖҷll be as cosy as a queen there and sheltered from the cold.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңOh, my darling, my darling!вҖқ murmured VГ©ronique, overcome with happiness.</p>
			<p>It was now the time for explanations; and VГ©ronique did not hesitate to give them. The boyвҖҷs grief at hearing of the death of all those whom he had known would be mitigated by the great joy which he felt at recovering his mother. She therefore spoke without reserve, cradling him in her lap, wiping away his tears, feeling plainly that she was enough to make up for all the lost affections and friendships. He was particularly afflicted by StГ©phaneвҖҷs death.</p>
			<p>вҖңBut is it quite certain?вҖқ he asked. вҖңFor, after all, there is nothing to tell us that he is drowned. StГ©phane is a perfect swimmer; and soвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Yes, yes, mother, we must not despairвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ on the contrary.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Look, hereвҖҷs a friend who always comes at the worst times, to declare that everything is not lost.вҖқ</p>
			<p>AllвҖҷs Well came trotting along. The sight of his master did not appear to surprise him. Nothing unduly surprised AllвҖҷs Well. Events, to his mind, always followed one another in a natural order which did not disturb either his habits or his occupations. Tears alone seemed to him worthy of special attention. And VГ©ronique and FranГ§ois were not crying.</p>
			<p>вҖңYou see, mother? AllвҖҷs Well agrees with me; nothing is lost.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ But, upon my word, AllвҖҷs Well, youвҖҷre a sharp little fellow! What would you have said, eh, if weвҖҷd left the island without you?вҖқ</p>
			<p>VГ©ronique looked at her son:</p>
			<p>вҖңLeft the island?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңCertainly: and the sooner the better. ThatвҖҷs my plan. What do you say to it?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңBut how are we to get away?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңIn a boat.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңIs there one here?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңYes, mine.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңWhere?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңClose by, at Sarek Point.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңBut how are we to get down? The cliff is perpendicular.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңSheвҖҷs at the very place where the cliff is steepest, a place known as the Postern. The name puzzled StГ©phane and myself. A postern suggests an entrance, a gate. Well, we ended by learning that, in the middle ages, at the time of the monks, the little isle on which the Priory stands was surrounded by ramparts. It was therefore to be presumed that there was a postern here which commanded an outlet on the sea. And in fact, after hunting about with Maguennoc, we discovered, on the flat top of the cliff, a sort of gully, a sandy depression reinforced at intervals by regular walls made of big building-stones. A path winds down the middle, with steps and windows on the side of the sea, and leads to a little bay. That is the Postern outlet. We repaired it: and my boat is hanging at the foot of the cliff.вҖқ</p>
			<p>VГ©roniqueвҖҷs features underwent a transformation:</p>
			<p>вҖңThen weвҖҷre safe now!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңThereвҖҷs no doubt of that.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAnd the enemy canвҖҷt get there?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңHow could he?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңHe has the motorboat at his disposal.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңHe has never been there, because he doesnвҖҷt know of the bay nor of the way down to it either: you canвҖҷt see them from the open sea. Besides, they are protected by a thousand sharp-pointed rocks.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAnd whatвҖҷs to prevent us from leaving at once?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңThe darkness, mother. IвҖҷm a good mariner and accustomed to navigate all the channels that lead away from Sarek, but I should not be at all sure of not striking some reef or other. No, we must wait for daylight.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңIt seems so long!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңA few hoursвҖҷ patience, mother. And we are together, you and I! At break of dawn, weвҖҷll take the boat and begin by hugging the foot of the cliff till we are underneath the cells. Then weвҖҷll pick up StГ©phane, who of course will be waiting for us on some strip of beach, and weвҖҷll all be off, wonвҖҷt we, AllвҖҷs Well? WeвҖҷll land at Pont-lвҖҷAbbГ© at twelve oвҖҷclock or so. ThatвҖҷs my plan.вҖқ</p>
			<p>VГ©ronique could not contain her delight and admiration. She was astonished to find so young a boy giving proofs of such self-possession.</p>
			<p>вҖңItвҖҷs splendid, darling, and youвҖҷre right in everything. Luck is decidedly coming our way.вҖқ</p>
			<p>The evening passed without incidents. An alarm, however, a noise under the rubbish which blocked the underground passage and a ray of light trickling through a slit obliged them to mount guard until the minute of their departure. But it did not affect their spirits.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhy, of course IвҖҷm easy in my mind,вҖқ said FranГ§ois. вҖңFrom the moment when I found you again, I felt that it was for good. Besides, if the worst came to the worst, have we not a last hope left? StГ©phane spoke to you about it, I expect. And it makes you laugh, my confidence in a rescuer whom I have never seen.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Well, I tell you, mother, if I were to see a dagger about to strike me, I should be certain, absolutely certain, mind you, that a hand would come and ward off the blow.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAlas,вҖқ she said, вҖңthat providential hand did not prevent all the misfortunes of which I told you!вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңIt will keep off those which threaten my mother,вҖқ declared the boy.</p>
			<p>вҖңHow? This unknown friend has not been warned.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңHe will come all the same. He doesnвҖҷt need to be warned to know how great the danger is. He will come. And, mother, promise me one thing: whatever happens, you must have confidence.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңI will have confidence, darling, I promise you.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңAnd you will be right,вҖқ he said, laughing, вҖңfor I shall be the leader. And what a leader, eh, mother? Why, yesterday evening I foresaw that, to carry the enterprise through successfully and so that my mother should be neither cold nor hungry, in case we were not able to take the boat this afternoon, we must have food and rugs! Well, they will be of use to us tonight, seeing that for prudenceвҖҷs sake we mustnвҖҷt abandon our post here and sleep at the Priory. Where did you put the parcel, mother?вҖқ</p>
			<p>They ate gaily and with a good appetite. Then FranГ§ois wrapped his mother up and tucked her in: and they both fell asleep, lying close together, happy and unafraid.</p>
			<p>When the keen air of the morning woke VГ©ronique, a belt of rosy light streaked the sky. FranГ§ois was sleeping the peaceful sleep of a child that feels itself protected and is untroubled by dreams. For a long time she just sat gazing at him without wearying: and she was still looking at him when the sun was high above the horizon.</p>
			<p>вҖңTo work, mother,вҖқ he said, after he had opened his eyes and given her a kiss. вҖңNo one in the tunnel? No. Then we have plenty of time to go on board.вҖқ</p>
			<p>They took the rugs and provisions and, with brisk steps, went towards the descent leading to the Postern, at the extreme end of the island. Beyond this point the rocks were heaped up in formidable confusion: and the sea, though calm, lapped against them noisily.</p>
			<p>вҖңI hope your boatвҖҷs there still!вҖқ said VГ©ronique.</p>
			<p>вҖңLean over a little, mother. You can see her down there, hanging in that crevice. We have only to work the pulley to get her afloat. Oh, itвҖҷs all very well thought out, mother darling! We have nothing to fear.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ OnlyвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ onlyвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>He had interrupted himself and was thinking.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhat? What is it?вҖқ asked VГ©ronique.</p>
			<p>вҖңOh, nothing! A slight delay.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңButвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
			<p>He began to laugh:</p>
			<p>вҖңReally, for the leader of an expedition, itвҖҷs rather humiliating, I admit. Just fancy, IвҖҷve forgotten one thing: the oars. They are at the Priory.вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңBut this is terrible!вҖқ cried VГ©ronique.</p>
			<p>вҖңWhy? IвҖҷll run to the Priory and I shall be back in ten minutes.вҖқ</p>
			<p>All VГ©roniqueвҖҷs apprehensions returned:</p>
			<p>вҖңAnd suppose they make their way out of the tunnel meanwhile?вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңCome, come, mother,вҖқ he laughed, вҖңyou promised to have confidence. To get out of the tunnel would take them an hourвҖҷs hard work; and we should hear them. Besides, whatвҖҷs the use of talking, mother? IвҖҷll be back at once.вҖқ</p>
			<p>He ran off.</p>
			<p>вҖңFranГ§ois! FranГ§ois!вҖқ</p>
			<p>He did not reply.</p>
			<p>вҖңOh,вҖқ she thought, once more assailed by forebodings. вҖңI had sworn not to leave him for a second!вҖқ</p>
			<p>She followed him at a distance and stopped on a hillock between the FairiesвҖҷ Dolmen and the Calvary of the Flowers. From here she could see the entrance to the tunnel and also saw her son jogging along the grass.</p>
			<p>He first went into the basement of the Priory. But the oars seemed not to be there, for he came out almost at once and went to the main door, which he opened and disappeared from sight.</p>
			<p>вҖңOne minute ought to be plenty for him,вҖқ said VГ©ronique to herself. вҖңThe oars must be in the hallвҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ or at any rate on the ground-floor.вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Say two minutes, at the outside.вҖқ</p>
			<p>She counted the seconds while watching the entrance to the tunnel.</p>
			<p>But three minutes, four minutes, five minutes passed: and the front-door did not open again.</p>
			<p>All VГ©roniqueвҖҷs confidence vanished. She thought that it was mad of her not to have gone with her son and that she ought never to have submitted to a childвҖҷs will. Without troubling about the tunnel or the dangers from that side, she began to walk towards the Priory. But she had the horrible feeling which people sometimes experience in dreams, when their legs seem paralysed and when they are unable to move, while the enemy advances to attack them.</p>
			<p>And suddenly, on reaching the Dolmen, she beheld a sight the meaning of which was immediately clear to her. The ground at the foot of the oaks round the right-hand part of the semicircle was littered with lately cut branches, which still bore their green leaves.</p>
			<p>She raised her eyes and stood stupefied and dismayed.</p>
			<p>One oak alone had been stripped. And on the huge trunk, bare to a height of twelve or fifteen feet, there was a paper, transfixed by an arrow and bearing the inscription, вҖң<abbr class="eoc" epub:type="z3998:surname">V. dвҖҷH.</abbr>вҖқ</p>
			<p>вҖңThe fourth cross,вҖқ VГ©ronique faltered, вҖңthe cross marked with my name!вҖқ</p>
			<p>She supposed that, as her father was dead, the initials of her maiden name must have been written by one of her enemies, the chief of them, no doubt; and for the first time, under the influence of recent events, remembering the woman and the boy who were persecuting her, she involuntarily attributed a definite set of features to that enemy.</p>
			<p>It was a fleeting impression, an improbable theory, of which she was not even conscious. She was overwhelmed by something much more terrible. She suddenly understood that the monsters, those creatures of the heath and the cells, the accomplices of the woman and the boy, must have been there, since the cross was prepared. No doubt they had built a footbridge and thrown it over the chasm to take the place of the bridge to which she had set fire. They were masters of the Priory. And FranГ§ois was once more in their hands!</p>
			<p>Then she rushed straight along, collecting all her strength. She in her turn ran over the turf, dotted with ruins, that sloped towards the front of the house.</p>
			<p>вҖңFranГ§ois! FranГ§ois! FranГ§ois!вҖқ</p>
			<p>She called his name in a piercing voice. She announced her coming with loud cries. Thus did she reach the Priory.</p>
			<p>One half of the door stood ajar. She pushed it and darted into the hall, crying:</p>
			<p>вҖңFranГ§ois! FranГ§ois!вҖқ</p>
			<p>The call rang from floor to attic and throughout the house, but remained unanswered:</p>
			<p>вҖңFranГ§ois! FranГ§ois!вҖқ</p>
			<p>She went upstairs, opening doors at random, running into her sonвҖҷs room, into StГ©phaneвҖҷs, into HonorineвҖҷs. She found nobody.</p>
			<p>вҖңFranГ§ois! FranГ§ois!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ DonвҖҷt you hear me? Are they hurting you?вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Oh, FranГ§ois, do answer!вҖқ</p>
			<p>She went back to the landing. Opposite her was <abbr>M.</abbr> dвҖҷHergemontвҖҷs study. She flung herself upon the door and at once recoiled, as though stricken by a vision from hell.</p>
			<p>A man was standing there, with arms crossed and apparently waiting for her. And it was the man whom she had pictured for an instant when thinking of the woman and the boy. It was the third monster!</p>
			<p>She said, simply, but in a voice filled with inexpressible horror:</p>
			<p>вҖңVorski!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰ Vorski!вҒ вҖҠвҒ вҖҰвҖқ</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
